---
title:  "HTML5's Design Principles"
description:
categories: general
date: 2016-01-21
---

The one thing I believe as a developer is if you want to have an intimate understanding of a language, tool, paradigm, or concept; you should learn why and/or how it was the language/tool/paradigm/concept was created. Learning the why not only gives you an understanding but it also gives you certain insights like, the big shift toward web applications (this might be a bad example). A couple of years ago, about...2011, I wrote a paper on the design of HTML5 and oddly, I've been finding myself talking about this topic years later. It seems to me that a lot of people don't know the story and thinking behind the technology they use on a daily basis... it's actually pretty interesting.

 In 2004, the W3C was in the process of creating XHTML2. XHTML2 was going to take the web in completely new direction as it was going to create a more XML based web. In June of that year, the W3C held a workshop on web applications where members of the W3C, software developers, web developers and representatives can come and propose their position papers on various issues and questions revolving around web applications. In this workshop, Ian Hickson from Opera Software along with representatives from the Mozilla Foundation gave a presentation on their position on the future of the web. They believed that they should focus existing web technologies such as HTML, CSS and DOM and add features to it to make it more powerful for web applications. Their ideas were not favorable amongst the W3C and they were voted against. This caused a break, Ian Hickson as well as representatives from the Mozilla Foundation and Apple split away from the W3C and formed the Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group (WHATWG) and started focusing on making HTML a more power language with specifications such as Web Forms 2.0 and Web Apps 1.0. This specification to make HTML more powerful was the initial groundwork of HTML5 and it picked up a lot of traction. So much that the W3C abandoned the XHTML2 project to work on their own version of HTML5. Eventfully (and thankfully), in 2006, the W3C established an HTML Working Group to work along with the WHATWG and build upon the work they already had started with Web Apps 1.0 to create a future version of HTML. The Web Apps 1.0 specification eventually became the HTML5 specification.

